so we used to solve big problems on July
the 21st 1969 Buzz Aldrin climbed out of
a pottery Levin's lunar module and
descended onto the Sea of Tranquility
Armstrong and Aldrin were alone but
their presence on the moon's gray
surface was the culmination of a
convulsive collective effort the Apollo
program was the greatest peacetime
mobilization in the history of the
United States to get to the moon NASA
spent around one hundred and eighty
billion dollars in today's money or four
percent of the federal budget apollo
employed around 400,000 people and
demanded the collaboration of 20,000
companies universities and government
agencies people died including the crew
of Apollo 1 but before the Apollo
program ended 24 men flew to the moon 12
walked on its surface of whom Aldrin
following the death of Armstrong last
year is now the most senior so why did
they go they didn't bring much back 841
pounds of old rocks and something all 24
later emphasized a new sense of the
smallness and the fragility of our
common home why did they go the cynical
answer as they went because President
Kennedy wanted to show the Soviets that
his nation had the better rockets but
Kennedy's own words at Rice University
in 1962 provide a better clue but why
some say the moon why choose this as our
goal and they may well ask why climb the
highest mountain why 35 years ago fly
the Atlantic why does Rice play Texas we
choose to go to the moon
we choose to go to the moon
we choose to go to the moon in this
decade and do the other things not
because they are easy but because they
are hard to contemporaries Apollo wasn't
only a victory of West over East in the
Cold War at the time the strongest
emotion was of wonder at the
transcendent powers of technology they
went because it was a big thing to do
landing on the moon occurred in the
context of a long series of
technological triumph the first half of
the 20th century produced the assembly
line and the aeroplanes penicillin and a
vaccine for tuberculosis in the middle
years of the century polio was
eradicated and smallpox eliminated
technology itself seemed to possess what
alvin toffler in 1970 called
accelerative thrust for most of human
history we could go no faster than a
horse or a boat with a sail but in 1969
the crew of Apollo 10 flew at 25,000
miles an hour since 1970 no human beings
have been back to the moon no one has
traveled faster than the crew of Apollo
10 and blithe optimism about
technology's powers has evaporated as
big problems we had imagined technology
would solve such as going to Mars
creating clean energy curing cancer or
feeding the world have come to seem
intractably hard I remember watching the
liftoff of Apollo 17 I was five years
old and my mother told me not to stare
the fiery exhaust of a Saturn five
rocket I vaguely knew this was to be the
last of the moon missions but I was
absolutely certain there would be Mars
colonies in my lifetime so something
happened to our capacity to solve big
problems with technology has become a
commonplace you hear it all the time
we've heard it over the last two days
here at
it feels as if technologists have
diverted us and enriched themselves with
trivial toys with things like iPhones
and apps and social media or algorithms
that speed automated trading there's
nothing wrong with most of these things
they've expanded and enriched our lives
but they they don't solve humanity's big
problems what happened
so there is a parochial explanation in
Silicon Valley which admits that it has
been funding less ambitious companies
then it did in the years when it
financed Intel Microsoft Apple and
Genentech Silicon Valley says the
markets are to blame in particular the
incentives that venture capitalist
offered to entrepreneurs
Silicon Valley says that venture
investing shifted away from funding
transformational ideas and towards
funding incremental or problems or even
fake problems but I don't think that
explanation is good enough it mostly
explains what's wrong with Silicon
Valley
even when venture capitalists were at
their most risk happy
they preferred small investments tiny
investments that offered an exit within
10 years VCS have always struggled to
invest profitably in technologies such
as energy whose capital requirements are
huge and whose development is long and
lengthy and VCS have never never funded
the development of technologies meant to
solve big problems that possess no
immediate commercial value now the
reasons we can't solve big problems are
more complicated and more profound
sometimes we choose not to solve big
problems we could go to Mars if we want
NASA even has the outline of a plan but
going to Mars would follow a political
decision with popular appeal and that
will never happen
we won't go to Mars because everyone
thinks there are more important things
to do here on earth sometimes we can't
solve big problems because our political
systems fail today less than 2% of the
world's energy consumption derives from
advanced renewable sources such as solar
wind and biofuels less than 2% and the
reason is purely economic coal and
natural gas are cheaper than solar and
wind and petroleum is cheaper than
biofuels
we want alternative energy sources that
can compete on price none exist now
technologists business leaders and
economists all basically agree on what
national policies and international
treaties would spur the development of
alternative energy mostly a significant
increase in energy research and
development and some kind of price on
carbon but there is no hope in the
present political climate that we will
see US energy policy or international
treaties that reflect that consensus
sometimes big problems that had seemed
technological turn out not to be so
famines were long understood to be
caused by failures and food supply but
thirty years of research have taught us
that famines are political crises that
catastrophic affect food distribution
technology can improve things like crop
yields or systems for storing and
transporting food but there will be
famines so long as there are bad
governments finally big problems
sometimes elude solution because we
don't really understand the problem
President Nixon declared war on cancer
in 1971 but we soon discovered there are
many kinds of cancer most of them
fiendishly resistant to therapy and it
is only in the last 10 years that
effective viable therapies have come to
seem real
Howard problems are hard it's not true
that we can't solve big problems through
technology we can we must but these four
elements must all be present political
leaders and the public must care to
solve a problem institutions must
support its solution it must really be a
technological problem and we must
understand it
the apollo mission which has become a
kind of metaphor for technology's
capacity to solve big problems met these
criteria but it is an irreproducible
model for the future
it is not 1961 there is no galvanizing
contest like the Cold War no politician
like John Kennedy who can Harrow eyes
the difficult and the dangerous and no
popular science fictional mythology such
as exploring the solar system most of
all going to the moon turned out to be
easy
it was just three days away and arguably
it wasn't even solving much of a problem
we are left alone with our day and the
solutions of the future will be harder
one God knows we don't lack for
challenges thank you very much
[Applause]